Thank you very much.
It's my pleasure to
welcome you to session 200,
which is a Graphics and Imaging Overview.
What we typically do at the
sort of overview session for
the Graphics Track at WWDC is we
followed a formula in the past,
and that formula is essentially tell
you about the new announcements for
the upcoming technology announcements
for the upcoming version of Mac OS X,
and then point you to various
sessions that are going to talk
about those particular technologies.
And we're actually going to change
things up a little bit this year.
And what we're going to do is
sort of recast the session.
And we're going to actually recast it as
a Graphics and Imaging Direction session.
Because there's a very important
thing that's happening at Apple,
that our rate of innovation in terms
of the graphics technologies that we
build into Mac OS X is incredible.
We have fantastic technologies
such as Quartz Extreme,
a compositing windowing system
that gives us the ability to create
dramatic visual effects such as expose,
and also the fast user switching that
everyone seemed to like yesterday.
And we're going to be able to create a
lot of different kinds of visual effects,
such as the image that we're seeing here,
and the image that we're
seeing on the screen.
And we're going to be able to create a
lot of different kinds of visual effects,
and we're going to be able to create a
lot of different kinds of visual effects.
And we're going to be able to create a
And we're going to be able to
create a lot open graphics.
And with your release cycles being
anywhere from 12 to 24 months,
it's often difficult for you
guys to see where the trend is,
to see which technologies you guys
need to really invest in in terms
of building your products on to make
sure you make maximum use of the
platform and create really compelling
applications for our mutual users.
So what we're going to do with this
session is we're going to focus on
two main themes that we have that
run through our sort of technology
innovation and graphics at Apple.
That's going to be PDF and also the
ascendancy of the GPU as a way to
do a lot of even 2D graphics work.
So what I'd like to do is
invite Peter Graffagnino,
the director of graphics and
imaging software to the stage,
and he's going to take
you through the session.
Thank you.
PETER GRAFFANINO: Thanks, Travis.
Great.
Thanks, Travis.
Thank you very much, Travis.
Good to be here at WWDC.
Good to see all you guys here.
I think we've got a
great week for you today,
this week at WWDC.
And today in particular,
we're going to take you
through the overview of the
graphics and imaging sessions,
which are always fun sessions at WWDC.
The first thing I'm going to do is,
for those of you who are new
to Mac OS X or new to WWDC,
is do a brief overview of the
graphics architecture of Mac OS X.
Then I'm going to go into,
as Travis said,
two kind of central themes,
underlying themes that we see in the
industry and that we're taking advantage
of in Mac OS X that I think it's really
important for you guys to understand.
The first one is about PDF,
which we call Mac OS X's digital paper.
The next is the GPU computing revolution,
which I think is a real
significant development.
And finally,
we'll go and do the tour of technologies
and show you what's new in Panther.
So first of all,
the block diagram review to all of you.
We've got our Core OS, Darwin,
at the bottom, based on FreeBSD and Mach.
Graphics layers on top of that.
And then the frameworks, Cocoa, Carbon,
and on top of that the user interface,
Aqua.
In the graphics areas,
we've got all of our technologies:
Quartz 2D for 2D graphics,
OpenGL for 3D graphics,
QuickTime for multimedia and video,
and our compositing windowing
system called Quartz Compositor.
QuickTime you heard about if
you were in the session before.
It was a general overview
of QuickTime directions.
They've combined the QuickTime live
conference with WWDC this year,
so there's a lot of great
content on QuickTime,
but I'm not really going to
talk about it right here.
Quartz 2D, I'll give you a brief overview
of what's in Quartz 2D.
Basically, it's our 2D imaging model
based on the industry standard
PostScript and PDF model.
This imaging model's been
around for a number of years,
almost 20 years now.
And it's really kind of a credit
to the original designers that it's
able to describe basically every
page that's ever been printed.
In fact, Adobe is celebrating the 20th
anniversary of PostScript,
and they published a nice book that
was kind of an interesting read if
you're into the history of this stuff.
But anyway,
our Quartz 2D imaging model is based
on the industry standard PostScript,
and it's really just a lightweight
C library that implements the
PostScript imaging model primitives.
And so there's no display PDF,
as some people have asked about,
or display PostScript or
anything like that.
It's really just a lightweight C library.
We can read and write
PDF with that library,
so you can think of PDF as
kind of the meta-file format
for the graphics library.
In fact, we knew we wanted PDF to
be the meta-file format,
so we kind of worked backward
from that to figure out what
the good API would be for that.
We've got really fast anti-aliasing.
As you see in the Acquius interface,
the quality of the presentation
of the line art and graphics
and icons is really important,
so we spent a lot of time making
things look good and run real fast.
It has Destination Alpha,
which allows us to record
coverage information as we draw.
This allows us to do composited
icons and sprites that can carry
along their anti-aliasing information
as they animate or move around.
One of the great things about PostScript,
it really revolutionized
digital typography,
invented outline fonts,
device-independent fonts,
and over the years there's
of course been Type 1,
the original Adobe digital font format.
There's been TrueType
that Apple invented,
and OpenType, and others have come along.
And Apple has a great technology called
Apple Type Services that Quartz 2D
leverages to bring you all the typefaces
and just handle them seamlessly for you,
including a full Type 1 scaler.
ColorSync is also built into Quartz 2D.
It's our implementation of the
ICC standard for color-managed
workflow and allows us to manage color
end-to-end in the Quartz 2D library.
And obviously one of the big
things about a 2D library is
how it relates to printing.
Basically the whole WYSIWYG notion of
being able to have the same imaging
model for screen and printing.
And so Quartz and PDF play
very much a central role in the
printing architecture as well.
The spool file we create when
you go to draw into your printing
context is just a PDF file.
And then that PDF file is rasterized
for inkjet printers using the same
high-quality Quartz rasterization,
or converted to PostScript for
a PostScript printer.
And again,
we can use the end-to-end color
management we have in the system to
manage color through the whole process.
And the infrastructure we build
all the core graphics conversion
around that's part of printing,
and just important,
is sort of the spooling and sequencing
architecture and the networking
architecture around printing.
And for that we're using an open
source technology called CUPS,
which stands for
Common Unix Printing System,
which is an implementation of
an open standard called IPP.
And it's kind of an upgrade if you're
familiar with the LPR/LPD suite
that comes along with Unix.
This is kind of an upgrade to that.
There are still command line utilities
that do the same LPD/LPR functions,
but CUPS provides much more
modern infrastructure for that.
for that.
So that's Quartz 2D to give you
a brief framework in which to
think about our 2D graphics.
For 3D graphics, it's OpenGL.
Again, industry standard technology,
been around for maybe 15 years as
the original Iris graphics library
on the silicon graphics machines.
And Apple's implementation is really
a state-of-the-art implementation.
We took our job very seriously in terms
of building an OS infrastructure around
driving graphics cards and virtualizing
resources like video memory usage.
And we have a lot of data flow
optimizations to make sure things
like multimedia and video can flow
through the system very quickly.
[Transcript missing]
So that's OpenGL.
Last kind of review bullet here
is about the Quartz Compositor.
The Quartz Compositor is our
implementation of the windowing system.
Basically composites all the
layers together on the screen.
It's based, again,
on some pretty tried and true
techniques in the industry.
A seminal paper,
a 1984 SIGGRAPH about the compositing
algebra by Porter and Duff.
They basically introduced the
notion of the alpha channel,
RGBA compositing,
and a whole algebra for doing that.
And in those days,
they were doing things like they
had one program that could render
fractals and one program that could,
say, render spheres.
And you didn't want to run them
both every frame if one was static.
And so you needed a way to combine
the results after the rendering
with high quality anti-aliasing.
And that's where the compositing
algebra came into play.
And it's been used pretty
much ever since as a real
fundamental primitive of graphics.
And what we're doing is just using
that in real time on the display.
And we're using that to composite
the output of all the applications to
make up the graphical user interface.
So here's a block diagram
of Quartz Extreme,
which we announced last year,
which is the implementation of the
Quartz compositor on top of OpenGL.
So the application can be drawing in
whatever graphics library it wants,
whether it's Quartz 2D, OpenGL,
QuickTime.
And basically,
the compositor will blend those
together using GL into the frame buffer.
Now, Panther is kind of our third
generation of this sort of
desktop compositing engine.
We originally,
in the first release of Mac OS X,
it was all software-based
solution with some hardware
acceleration for like moving opaque
windows and things like that.
In Jaguar,
we put everything on top of GL.
In Panther,
we've been refining it further to
make it suitable for things like
the expose feature that you saw.
And it's really the natural
evolution of windowing systems.
I really think people and users
just expect Windows to composite
and I think everyone's going
to be doing this eventually.
And Apple OpenGL,
since we've proven in Jaguar and
been running the desktop compositor
on top of GL ever since Jaguar,
I think it's obvious that Apple GL is
robust enough for 24 by 7 operation.
And the other thing that's key
to understand about the Quartz
Extreme implementation is once
it gets the textured polygons it
needs to draw to make up the GUI,
there's really no special
OpenGL calls it makes.
All of the acceleration in terms of
minimal CPU copies and getting data
to the frame buffer and the blending
modes and all of those things are
accessible to OpenGL developers.
So we did a lot of tuning on the data
paths to make sure we did minimal copies
because when you're throwing around,
you know, megabytes per window,
you really can't copy any data.
But all of those advantages,
advances are usable by you.
And in fact,
the keynote guys take advantage of a
lot of those because they have pretty
big textures when they're compositing
and doing transitions as well.
So the big thing that we did new
with Quartz Extreme this year,
one of the main things was the expose.
I'm not going to give you a demo
because you saw it in the keynote,
but basically the idea of animating all
your windows so you can see everything,
have a nice ability to pick
up an icon off the desktop
and without having to drop it,
release the windows and be able
to drag it into something else.
So that's basically
the Quartz compositor.
So there you have all the
graphics technologies in
Mac OS X in sort of a brief review.
Let me go into now one of my
first kind of extended themes that
I'm going to talk about today,
and that's PDF,
what I call Mac OS X's digital paper.
And this is not really a general kind
of PDF in the industry discussion,
but kind of how we view PDF as
an OS implementer and provider,
and what we're using it for in
terms of the OS and the kind of
opportunities we're trying to make
available for you guys as developers.
So first off, this digital paper notion.
PDF, the best way I can always think of
to describe to someone what PDF is,
is just to say digital paper.
Because it really is a digital
representation of a printed page.
So in other words,
it's got pagination built in,
and it can basically represent
the output from any application,
so it's application independent.
It can present output to
any number of devices.
It can handle any color
spaces or whatever,
so it's device independent.
And it's extremely high fidelity.
I mean, basically,
the imaging model behind PDF is the same
as the imaging model behind PostScript.
And as I said before,
it's been able to describe
basically every page ever printed
in the last 20 years or so.
So that's pretty high fidelity.
And there's 500 million
viewers distributed,
so it's obviously universal.
You can send someone a PDF file
and be pretty guaranteed that
no matter what platform on,
they'll be able to look at it.
So the way I think about it is,
PDF is really universal sort
of view level abstraction
in the MVC paradigm world.
And when I put these slides together,
I didn't know MVC was going to be
such a theme at WWDC this year.
So I have a brief review of MVC from
a graphics guy's standpoint.
So MVC is a standard way
object-oriented programmers have
thought about factoring code into
a model of view in a controller.
And my example is, basically,
the model is the application data.
So the model is the application
data structures like the variables
and the algorithms and the data
behind the model of the program.
The view is a visual representation.
So it could be a pie
chart or a bar graph,
whatever you want.
The idea is you can have multiple
views of the same model data.
And the controller might be a
user interface area where you let,
you know,
the user type into a field to change
the data to manipulate the model.
And so basically,
the value of MVC is the fact that
you've factored your code so you have
a model that can have multiple views.
So if you have a pie
chart or a bar graph,
you don't have to change
your implementation of how to
recalculate the spreadsheet.
Models can have multiple controllers,
so you can have a simple user interface,
an advanced user interface,
or even a scripting interface,
and have your model code be the same.
And kind of from a graphics standpoint,
the interesting thing is that any model,
whether it's spreadsheet, database,
audio file, or whatever,
can project themselves into a 2D
representation to show to the user.
Otherwise,
the user wouldn't be able to run the
app because they couldn't see the data.
And so views of vastly different models
can share a common visual language.
And this is how graphical user
interfaces work when you think about it.
I mean, you basically have
similar-looking windows,
but presenting vastly different
models of--depending upon
which application is being run.
The same thing with documents,
compound documents,
where you may have part of a
document coming from a spreadsheet,
part of a document
coming out of a database,
part of a document from a text flow.
And because you can project all those
things down to a view-level format,
which is, say, a PDF file,
you can have them all share
the common visual language,
even though the actual data
backing them is pretty different.
So let's move on here.
I might have to use the
old fashioned way here.
OK.
So document-based applications
are really MVC in their nature.
You can think of the model as
kind of the application file.
The data structures of the application,
in this case Excel-- the Excel file is
really you can think of as the model.
The view would be like the
document window that comes up,
where you get the row and column
representation of the model.
The controller would
be the user interface,
the application, all the menus and panels
that you interact with.
I'll try this one more time.
There we go.
So the interesting thing to realize
from a graphic standpoint is when you
create a PDF from your spreadsheet,
it's no longer a spreadsheet.
You've projected that model into a view,
and you really just have a
representation of a spreadsheet.
And I think it's really important
to keep the difference between
models and views and look at
it this way and how PDF serves.
So model versus view.
You can imagine if I'm
interacting with someone,
I have a choice of whether to send them
the Excel file or send them the PDF that
represents the data in the Excel file.
And really both are valid choices.
On the left-hand with the model,
I get a very high fidelity
model representation.
I can exchange data and they
can modify the model if they
want or change the formulas.
It requires that they're going to
have that application and also have
any fonts or plug-ins that I may
have used in creating that model.
On the other hand,
on the view exchange side,
if I send them a PDF,
I can guarantee that they're going
to be able to see it because there's
500 million viewers out there.
They're going to see the right fonts.
They're going to see everything.
They're not going to be able to
interact with the data or change
the basic calculations that go on.
In fact, in many cases,
you don't want that.
But they are going to get a high
fidelity view representation.
So one of the reasons why this is,
I think, important to lay out is that
if you look at the typical
file menu of a application,
sometimes we get asked why save
as PDF isn't just in there.
And I think the reason has to do
with this model versus view idea.
Normally in the file menu,
when you're talking about open, close,
save, or even export,
you're talking about exporting or saving
the actual model data of the application,
which could be, you know, anything.
But when you talk about saving as PDF,
what you're really talking
about is essentially going
through the print process,
the mapping of the model data
to a paginated representation,
but just not sending it to any device,
just keeping that as
a digital file around.
And so saving the PDF,
I really conceptually think of as
just printing the digital paper.
And that's really the notion, I think,
that carries us the furthest in
terms of how to think about this.
And so what really
hasn't been said before,
but I think is a really important point,
is that Mac OS X is the first commercial
OS to have a system-wide standard
for digital paper that's universal.
And PDF truly is universal in
terms of being able to view it.
So PDF is not a great
model-level construct,
and there are some cases where
maybe it's possible to encode
sort of flowable text in PDF,
and this can be interesting in
sort of closed-loop situations,
but basically the thing to remember
here is that you are starting to
impose model-level constructs on what
is essentially a view-level idea,
and if you think about a text-flow model,
actually, they're quite complicated,
and a precise specification
would include your styling model,
your obstacle-avoidance model,
how your containers connect and flow,
a pagination model,
whether you allow widows and
orphans and those kind of things,
justification model,
and a hyphenation model,
which is then going to require
a whole-language dictionary so
you know how to break up words.
So a complete specification of an
actual text flow is fairly complicated,
and I think kind of beyond
the scope of what PDF,
and it's certainly not a universally
agreed-to notion of how to do it.
flow text.
So, and the main reason I think
that's true is it kind of
sacrifices the universality.
I mean, the amazing thing about PDF is
that everyone agrees that
it's a universally agreed-to
abstraction for marks on a page.
I don't think everyone necessarily agrees
that there is one universal abstraction
for global text documents or spreadsheets
or even that there should be one.
So our basic idea is that models
are precisely where applications
innovate and differentiate,
and we want apps to
but just always be able to print
down to a PDF because then we can
take that through the PDF workflow.
So again, our strategy is basically
to use PDF as digital paper,
use it as a final format of paginated
documents and also vector artwork.
Use other formats such as
XML to encode model data.
That's kind of our advice.
I mean, that's what we do with Keynote
and other applications.
And really build a rich framework
for processing this digital
paper in the operating system.
And encourage applications to
differentiate themselves by
developing innovative models.
So long live MVC separation.
So that's my little talk on MVC.
And let's see how that,
once we get all the applications
projecting their models into PDF,
how that really benefits
the graphic arts workflow.
So here I've drawn a sample
graphic arts workflow.
You can think of it starting
with application-dependent files,
removing the application-dependence
to get to some kind of digital
marks on a page representation,
and then finally going device-dependent
and either rasterizing to a set
of TIFFs for CMYK separations.
Basically going from device-independence
to device-dependence and
application-dependence to
application-independence.
So one of the traditional
ways this is done,
and this is really kind of the
key that made PDF possible,
is that all applications,
whether it's Word, Illustrator, Quark,
whatever, can make PostScript.
And what Adobe realized is that
if they can make PostScript,
we can sort of rebind the
PostScript language to this format
called PDF that's easier to read
and have a reader application for.
And so this is kind of the workflow that
was popular when PDF initially came out.
Basically everything
projected into PostScript,
then you'd run a process,
a distiller process, and create your PDF,
and you could maybe tune it for the
web and downsample the image or tune
it for print optimization or pre-press.
Now that's great, but there's really a
better way to do things,
I think.
I talk about creating a purposed
PDF for the web or for print,
but isn't PDF itself device-independent?
Suppose I create my web-optimized
PDF and later I realize I'd
rather have it print-optimized.
Well, then do I keep that PostScript file
around so that I can go
back to it and repurpose it?
Or do I keep the application file around?
Then I need the application.
So do we really want PS to be the
application-independent digital master?
I think it's pretty
clear the answer is no.
If you think about taking this picture
and just replacing the hub with PDF,
that's really the architecture that
we've been going for in Mac OS X.
And the nice thing about putting
PDF in the middle there is it's
really a better suited kind of
digital master format than PostScript.
Again, it's viewable on all these
copies of Acrobat out there,
and it really can losslessly encode the
application intent since it's exactly
the same imaging model as PostScript.
That digital master PDF that sits in the
middle doesn't have to pass judgment on
what the application is trying to draw.
If the application is trying to draw
high-definition images or high-resolution
images or weird color spaces,
or true type fonts or open type fonts,
I don't really have to care because
I just want to record what the
application is telling me to draw.
And then later on,
I can purpose it out if I need to.
And so the nice thing about adding PDF as
that center of the hub of just recording
what the application drew is not only can
I now later make a late-binding decision
whether I want to go web or print,
but I can also develop all these
device-independent PDF processing
tools instead of this opaque
PostScript file in the middle that
I need a language interpreter,
and I can't even tell you how many pages
are in it until I execute the document.
I now have a much better
device-independent representation there,
and I can write little tools
that do cover page or imposition
or whatever on top of that.
So that's really why I think it's key
to have PDF in the center of that.
And PDF processing on Mac OS X is
a pretty popular thing.
There's over 50 little PDF applications,
some not so little, on Mac OS X,
some from big names,
some from small names,
and Panther is going to
bring new opportunities.
And this is kind of one of the
thrusts with Panther on the 2D
side is really getting to leverage
the possibilities with PDF.
So we add a bunch of new
PDF workflow tools in Panther,
addressing PostScript file handling,
user-level scripting.
We have something called
Quartz PDF filters,
printing to a PDF workflow,
and PDF introspection APIs.
And let me go through
each of those briefly.
PostScript to PDF conversion
basically allows us to deal with
the PostScript legacy files,
not necessarily put
PostScript in the middle,
but provide a graphically lossless
transformation from PostScript to PDF.
It works with EPS files as well.
It's based on a real
PostScript interpreter,
and it's not a replacement for Distiller.
It doesn't do a lot of the finishing
options you have in Distiller.
But it basically allows us to
graphically transform PostScript to PDF.
The other nice thing on the printing
side is it allows us to accept
PostScript jobs to any printer from,
say,
a Windows client or a Mac OS 9 client.
So again, back to the picture,
now PostScript can feed that hub,
so we can take PostScript files,
convert them to PDF,
and then have them in that hub and
subject to all the transformations
that all the great PDF tools you
guys are going to write can do.
Another aspect of the PostScript legacy
that was kind of lost along the
way was the ability to have some
level of user-level programmability.
PostScript was actually
a programming language,
and some people used it to
dynamically generate graphics.
So the PostScript program would
calculate the picture rather than
just being the output from a driver.
PDF can't really do this,
but the reverse Polish notation of
PostScript and its abilities as a
language also kind of made this a bear,
and this always turned out to be more
difficult than you'd like it to be.
But nonetheless,
some people found this incredibly
useful - the ability to have simple
scripting based down to the 2D graphics.
And although I never used
PostScript as a pickup line,
I found this on the web,
which I thought was pretty amusing.
So what we've done actually
is take the Quartz 2D API and
use a real scripting language,
Python, and to create Python bindings
for the Quartz 2D API.
It's basically the C language
API entry points that you can
see in the Quartz header files,
but just bound into a
Python interpreter with a module.
And this allows simple
PDF processing from scripts.
We've added some convenience
functions for dealing with QuickTime,
for getting images in and out,
for dealing with Cocoa in
terms of drawing HTML,
RTF, and Unicode,
and also for dealing with our
PostScript to PDF converter so you
can read PostScript and EPS files.
So basically,
I think this is going to allow a
new generation of script writers
to really write simple tools
to be able to manipulate PDF.
And it's really handy for small
one-off processing scripts.
And one of the reasons we did this
ourselves is we had a bunch of places
in the printing path where we just
need to make a simple change to the
document and rather than write code,
it's just easier to do it this way.
So you can imagine some examples
like rasterizing an EPS file to a
bitmap and exporting it via QuickTime,
doing some advanced imposition
algorithms for booklet typefaces,
and then booklet printing
or something like that.
Just concatenating two
PDF files together,
it's pretty--a few lines of code.
Adding a cover page or watermarks
to a PDF is pretty easy.
Dynamically generating graphics on
a server is something I think that's
going to be very interesting in
terms of being able to have all this
power in a server-based application.
Unlike PostScript,
you can't really override
the marking operators,
you can't redefine show and show page,
but for now we consider that
to be a feature because it's
a little bit unmaintainable.
So as an example, I actually did this,
went off and looked at the
old PostScript Blue book.
I don't know if any of you
guys remember that book,
but there's a simple example
in there called Wedge,
and it draws this little starburst here.
And that's the PostScript code on the
right and the Python code on the left.
Python code's a little bit longer,
but probably more readable,
certainly these days.
So.
Next thing I'm going to mention
briefly is Quartz PDF filters.
Quartz PDF filters allow us to
do some transformations on PDF,
mostly dealing with color
space transformations.
And you create these recipes
in the ColorSync utility.
And at the ColorSync session,
they're going to demo
this and talk about it.
And it can be used for color conversion
effects or even just we use it in the
printing path when we're going to a
black and white printer over a slow link.
We want to get rid of all the color
and just bring it down to black and
white before we send it over the wire.
It does have some imagery sampling and
compression options built in as well.
Print-to-PDF workflow - this
is something we announced back
in one of the Jaguar updates.
It allows you to extend the print panel,
again leveraging print as the hub
of where PDF workflow takes off.
And basically that "Save as PDF"
button in the print panel can grow
to any number of options that the
user wants in terms of applications
that can open and deal with PDF.
For example,
you could send the PDF off to
Illustrator and work on it,
or send it to Mail to bring
it up in a Compose window,
or Encrypted, or whatever.
So this is a great place to
hook in if you're writing a
little PDF processing tool,
and some of you guys
have already done this,
a great way to leverage into the system.
And lastly, our PDF introspection APIs,
which are new APIs in Panther which
allow you to have complete access
to the PDF document structure
as kind of the tree of objects.
It basically models the dictionaries,
streams, strings,
arrays that are in the PDF file itself.
It doesn't go and model the
internal of the graphic streams,
but it is useful for
extracting things like links,
annotations,
and metadata and stuff like that.
So enough talking for now.
Let's bring Ralph up to the
stage and give you a demo of some
of the stuff we have as far as
PDF processing in preview in Panther.
Welcome, Ralph.
Ralph Bezir: Hello.
So what I'm going to show you
first is preview in Panther,
which makes use of these new
PDF introspection APIs that
Peter was mentioning.
So I'm opening a PDF document here.
It's one of my favorite documents.
And it has a table of content
information embedded in the file.
And in Panther, if that's the case,
then the drawer to the right pops open
and shows you the table of contents.
You can navigate through
chapters and see,
for example, all the instructions that
the Velocity Engine has.
Click on one of them.
And, well, there's the back floor.
But similarly,
we also added search for PDFs.
So I can actually look for string not,
oops.
[Transcript missing]
Well, one thing that Peter was mentioning
is the PostScript to PDF conversion.
And what I'm going to do is
I essentially just double click a
PostScript document from Finder,
and the PostScript to
PDF conversion kicks in,
and it will open in preview briefly.
Yes, here it is.
So what you see here...
This is a paper I got from the internet.
It's in PostScript.
It just got converted.
Text is there, line art is there,
all the mathematical formulas are there,
so pretty much what you would expect.
And because it's now PDF,
all those tools we have to
work with PDFs now work on the
converted Postgres file as well.
So, for example,
I can go and search for the word
"image". Let me zoom in here.
And it actually highlights it for you.
And one of the coolest things, I think,
is you can even go and
copy-paste out of the document.
Like, I select a paragraph here.
Copy.
And I get a text representation
of the part I just copied out.
Okay.
Next thing I would like to
show you is part scripting.
What I have here is a
Python script that - well,
let's just go through it.
It opens a PDF file,
an existing PDF file,
and it creates a new PDF file.
And then it enumerates all
the pages in the PDF file,
gets the size of the particular page,
creates a new page in the output file,
and just draws the content of the
original page into the output file.
So, so far we didn't really
do anything exciting,
it's pretty much a copy operation.
And then we add some custom drawing.
In this case, we add red text to the
margin of the page.
Once we're done with it,
We tell the system to open that file with
the default PDF viewer of the system.
So what I'm going to do now is - well,
let me tell you first.
If you put that script into
the PDF services folder,
then it will appear in the print
panel as Peter was showing.
So if I go to the print panel,
where is it?
It takes a second.
So I'm going to print this script,
and I'm going to print
it through the script.
So it's kind of an
Azure-esque thing to do.
So let's see.
And there it is.
So I have to print out the script and it
added that confidential mark on the side.
So just to make that
point perfectly clear,
this works with everything.
So I can take my PostScript file
I just had before,
print it through the script.
[Transcript missing]
So for all of those of you who
have your theses locked away in .ps
files that you can't read anymore,
you can search them there.
I know a few people like that.
Okay, so Quartz and PDF summary.
PDF really provides
Mac OS X with a universal
representation of digital paper.
We plan to leverage that a lot more
in the operating system and hopefully
build lots of opportunities for
you guys as well to process PDF.
And our strategy is really to continue to
build on it as a view-level abstraction,
final form presentation metaphor for PDF.
And I hope we've convinced you that in
Panther we're adding a lot of really
significant tools to the PDF toolset.
And as my last comment,
I'd say if you're still
thinking Pixmaps and GWorlds,
come join the Quartz 2D party.
Go to the sessions, learn about it.
It's pretty fun stuff.
That's it for the PDF and
Quartz 2D session.
I'm going to change gears a little
bit now and talk about another
development in the industry.
This one's much bigger than Apple.
It's going on right now.
I'm going to call that the
GPU computing revolution.
There's really something going on now
in terms of the ability of graphics
processors to compute graphics at
much higher rates than even CPUs can.
[Transcript missing]
Then the fragments are processed,
so we apply texture mapping,
we calculate what the final
color in Z for that particular
pixel is going to be,
and then the last step
is fragment rendering,
where we do the Z check
against the frame buffer,
we do alpha blending, compositing, fog,
those kinds of things.
And so that's the whole
graphics pipeline,
and this is sort of the
way it's been for a while.
And what's happening is the GPU vendors
are opening up these two parts of the
graphics processor as being programmable.
So you can think of that little
stream execution unit kind of getting
plugged into the vertex processing
and fragment processing areas.
So when you hear those terms,
that's really what's going on.
You have a little,
a small little data flow engine
that can do a small calculation
per vertex or per fragment.
When I talk about fragments,
I also sometimes talk about pixels,
so I think sometimes it's
easier for people who are new
to 3D to think about pixels,
and that's okay with me.
So I'm going to talk
about pixel programming.
So pixel programming uses a
data model similar to AltaVec.
The programmable units operate on
128-bit four vectors of floats.
Obviously, your texture lookups may
come from 8-bit data,
but it's all expanded for
you into the floating point.
And you basically get to write a small
program that's executed per pixel to
calculate the result of the output pixel.
So you don't get control over
the blending and the Z test
and all that sort of stuff,
but you can get total control over
the source color of the pixel.
You get access to the iterated values,
so those little, the vertex attributes at
the corners of the triangle.
You get access to what that
value is for the particular
picture that you're drawing.
You can look in some global data.
You can look at,
do memory reads off of textures.
You can't look at the
destination picture.
You can't know what
you're going to draw to.
You just leave your output
in a special result register.
And there's a lot of
powerful ALU instructions,
like power, reciprocal square root,
cross product, all these kind of things,
and a bunch of swizzling
instructions for changing order
on the data units and the vectors.
So this is pseudo code.
This is not in any particular language,
just to try to communicate the
simplicity and the job of a pixel
program or a fragment program.
Basically, they all have the same
function signature.
Calculate pixel, returns a result,
gets the iterated values,
and it can do whatever
computation it wants.
It has access to some global constants,
as read only,
and a global set of textures
that it can go look up values in.
And that's really all it does.
Now I'm going to explain to
you why I think that once you
constrain the problem like that,
you can make it go real fast,
and why GPU designers kind of have
this advantage with the parallelism.
So this isn't how any
particular chip works,
but just how if you've constrained
the calculation like that,
how you might be able to design
hardware to make it go fast.
So first let's consider just a four
instruction-long fragment program,
and I have one vector unit right now,
so I'm going to just do
sequential processing through it.
I'm going to send my fragment
values into the vector unit,
and then basically clock
the instructions through.
So, I'm basically doing one
operation per clock.
I'm able to keep the
processor busy every cycle,
and I get one result every four clocks.
So, no big news there.
That's just sequential processing.
Now there's a lot of data level
parallelism in this problem.
Pixel calculations,
because of the way fragment
programs are constructed,
are independent.
So the result pixel at a particular
location can't depend on the
result pixel at another location.
The pixel calculations can
basically execute in parallel.
So call this parallelism in space,
because it's kind of in
the plane of the triangle.
What I can do here is just replicate
the fragment execution unit in width
and just do the same instruction
on multiple vectors at one time.
So here's how I might have that laid out.
Now I have eight vector units.
I can feed in simultaneously eight
fragment values into the pipeline.
and then basically sequence through
my instructions one at a time and
at the end get my eight results out.
So that gives us eight
vector operations per clock.
We're able to keep all eight
of those busy every clock.
We get eight results every four clocks
because it's four instructions long.
So on average,
throughput of two pixels per clock.
But wait, there's more.
Instruction-level
parallelism is also true,
because again, we're constrained.
We can't really write to any memory.
The machine state's only going to
differ between one instruction and
the next by the register that was
written to in the previous instruction.
So you can imagine compilation
techniques or even maybe some hardware
register renaming techniques coming
into place to just build a little
pipeline out of - or assembly line
out of a sequence of instructions.
So let's look at how that might work.
Now we're going to line up
the vector units in time,
and basically I'm going to teach each
vector unit about an instruction.
So vector unit one gets instruction one,
vector unit two gets instruction two,
and so on.
And now I'm going to feed my
fragment value in the top,
operate on it with instruction
one in the first vector unit,
move it on to instruction unit two.
Meanwhile I feed the next fragment
value into vector unit one and
kind of keep the pipeline full.
And once the pipeline is full,
I'm really just processing, again,
keeping all the units
busy at the same time.
And so now I'm fully
utilizing all my four units,
four operations per clock,
and I'm getting one result every
clock once the operation is full.
So obviously the next thing, no surprise,
I can put both of these things together
and basically exploit the time and
the space dimension at the same time.
So I just get a bigger chip,
drag out more vector units,
and make sort of a 32 element fabric
where I've got them four by eight
just for illustration purposes.
And now basically I can feed, you know,
teach each row about
a single instruction,
feed the fragments in,
fill up the pipeline,
and then basically get eight results per
clock with doing 32 operations per clock.
So eight results per clock.
So I think you can see
that as time goes on,
and maybe today is number 32,
tomorrow the number is 64,
you're not going to run out of gas in
the time dimension until the average
size of a triangle you begin to approach.
Which for image processing things
where you're rendering big triangles,
there's lots of parallel fragments.
And in space,
this is only a four instruction program,
you can obviously imagine
much longer instructions.
So there's a lot of headroom
just in terms of parallelism.
So basically my argument
is it will sustain,
and I think the chip capabilities
certainly hasn't peaked.
I think the parallel computing
possibilities haven't even
come close to peaking yet.
We've got sort of 8x4 as I drew here,
and I think there's still
lots of headroom for that.
And I think the entertainment industry
is going strong and has not peaked.
And as operating systems and
applications get into the game,
I think we're just going to add fuel to
this fire and really have an interesting
world where people are doing massively
parallel computations on the GPU to free
up their CPU to do other stuff as well.
So you might ask yourself,
"That sounds great.
How do I do it?" And the
answer is you use OpenGL.
In Panther, we have standard cross-vendor
programming languages at both the
vertex level and the fragment level.
Those begin with the ARB prefix,
which is the architecture
review board for OpenGL,
so you don't have to learn
vendor-specific extensions.
There are higher-level
language being worked on,
and those will come out as well.
But assembly-level language
will always be available,
and I think these
architectures are so new.
We found you get rid of one temporary,
and the thing runs twice as fast.
So people are probably going
to be tweaking assembly on
these things for a while.
Programs are relatively small,
so maybe that's not a big deal.
But the higher-level
languages are coming as well.
So, without further ado,
let's bring Ralph back up and
show you some Fragment programs.
We've got a Radeon 9700 plugged
into this machine over here,
which is running our Fragment program.
Go ahead, Raoul.
Okay.
So the first thing I'm going to show
you is the OpenGL Shader Builder
application that is in Pantor.
And well, you see it here.
On the left side,
you have your little fragment program,
and on the right side,
you have a very complex OpenGL scene,
which consists of a single rectangle.
So that rectangle has a texture on it,
and there's actually a fragment
program running right now
that does that texturing.
So if you look on the left side,
what this fragment program does,
it goes to the texture zero,
uses the current texture coordinate
to look up the color at that point,
and then copies that color to the result.
So you get a textured quad.
Well, this isn't terribly exciting
because non-programmable hardware
does exactly that for you,
so there's no point to
actually write this program.
But we can go and modify it a bit.
So for example,
instead of copying the color back
to the destination pixel unmodified,
I can say, well, only copy the green
and the alpha channel.
And, well,
the red and the blue channels are lost,
so you see the result here.
It is this rather unhealthy-looking cat.
Okay, so let's add an instruction
in the middle here.
After we did the texture lookup,
we take the red component
of the color and square it,
and then copy that to green
and blue to produce some kind
of a sapient tone effect.
But it doesn't look right.
So let's tweak the exponent a bit.
Let's say we take that one to the fifth,
yeah, one point two, something like this,
until you have the look you're going for.
Now what you noticed is whenever
I type in the background,
the program is compiled and run
and shown to you right away.
So you get immediate feedback
what your program does,
which is very nice to experiment
and to get into things.
Okay, that's it for Shader Builder.
Now that I've shown you what you
can do with three instructions,
let me show you what you can do if
you put a bit more effort into things.
Okay, so by the way,
this picture has been called Demo Monkey,
and so have I.
So the first thing I'm going to
show you is a motion blur effect
implemented as a fragment program.
The interface is essentially
I click somewhere and drag
the mouse in some direction,
and I get a motion
blur in that direction.
So the first thing you notice,
it's pretty smooth frame rate.
And really the GL operations,
the GL commands that are going on
here is there are four vertices,
four corners of that big rectangle,
and then it says draw.
So how you run your fragment
program is you draw a rectangle,
essentially.
And then for every pixel,
the fragment program gets
executed to do that effect.
So another effect we
tried is an axial blur,
like this.
And you can set the focus point
to wherever you want it to be,
like this.
So because what the CPU does
here is really negligible.
I mean, it says, you know,
here are four vertices, go.
And from then on it just waits
until the result is done.
So this is pretty much, this is a very,
very nice effect that is
fairly expensive to compute,
but it has pretty much zero CPU cost.
Let me show you a different one,
a glass distortion effect.
So you can make the bumps
bigger and smaller and
actually move the glass around.
Like this.
The last effect I would like to
show is like an emboss effect.
So what this does is it takes
the picture we had before
and interprets the brightness
values as hills and valleys in,
you know, like some kind of relief thing,
and then puts a spotlight on it.
So you can actually go and
drag the spotlight around.
Like this.
"Make the beam wider, narrower,
things like that.
And again,
you have to do that in a while to
realize you don't use any CPU at all.
The only thing the CPU does
is update the sliders."
Okay, I think that's it for
the Fragment Program.
Thanks, Ralph.
So in summary,
for this section of the GPU talk,
I really hope I've convinced you
that GPUs for certain classes of data
parallel workloads and algorithms
really have an advantage over CPUs.
And I think that this advantage
is going to be sustainable for
at least the foreseeable future.
And you can use this access
to this power via OpenGL.
And my advice to you is learn how to do
this stuff before your competitors do.
Because there's some pretty cool
things that are going to be happening.
So the last section I'm going
to talk about today is another
effort we've been working on,
which is Quartz 2D on OpenGL.
Quartz 2D on OpenGL basically accelerates
Quartz 2D by turning it into GL calls,
and it's really the logical
next step after Quartz Extreme.
It ties together the two key
thrusts we've talked about today
of programming the graphics
processor and PDF/2D implementation.
And in Panther,
we're going to have an initial
implementation of this that really
focuses mostly for GL developers who
want to get high-quality text and
line art into their applications,
which has always been a really
difficult thing to do with GL.
Okay.
So the way that you do this is you
take your GL context and you pass it
to a function called cgGLContextCreate.
You give the size of the
CG context you want and the color
space you want to render into,
and you just make CG calls
on that CG context ref.
It's high-quality 2D rendering.
It's virtually identical
to software quality.
We do use the alpha
blending in the hardware,
so it's not pixel.
The values aren't going
to be exactly the same,
but it basically looks
indistinguishable from software.
And it's anywhere from 2 to
10 times faster than Quartz
2D's software rendering.
The way it gets to be on the order of
10 times faster is when we can actually
cache things in the graphics unit.
So we'll cache fonts, glyphs as textures.
And if you hold on to your CG image
refs or CG pattern refs and reuse them,
the implementation will cache
those in video memory as well.
So you can draw very quickly with that.
The reason we're kind of calling
it an initial implementation right
now is because there are certain
Quartz 2D operations that are not
yet supported by this context.
For one thing,
we can't do the high quality LCD text
that we have in the system without
relying on fragment programming.
And since fragment programming is
kind of at the high end right now and
it's coming down through the system,
we can't really kind of turn on Quartz
2D acceleration everywhere right now.
The other thing is the
PDF 1.4 blend modes,
which are also going to
require fragment programming.
We also,
you have to be using the Core Graphics
API only or the Quartz 2D API only.
You can't turn around and draw
some quick draw with this thing.
You can't ask for the
locking the port bits.
And you can't use high level
frameworks on this context.
So you pretty much have to be going
right at it with the Quartz 2D API.
We do require Quartz
Extreme capable hardware,
so we have the non-power
of two texturing,
which is important for drawing
images and things like that.
And generally,
as this path becomes available,
I think applications,
are going to have to revisit some of
their assumptions about the cheapness
of accessing the drawing buffer,
the window buffer.
So it's another thing to be aware
of in your usage model if you want
to use this kind of acceleration.
So the basic way I tell this story is
that having a wide pipe is really great,
but it also increases the cost
of reading back pixels and
turning everything around.
So if you imagine you're on a
little stream towards the frame
buffer and you drop a few pixels in,
and you realize you want them back,
you're going to have
to go back and forth.
So if you imagine you're on a
little stream towards the frame
buffer and you drop a few pixels in,
and you realize you want them back,
you're going to have
to go back and forth.
Yeah, maybe you can just reach down
the stream and grab them,
but if you drop them over
the top of Niagara Falls,
we've got to stop the falls,
let all the water fall down,
climb down there, get the pixels,
bring them back up.
You're not going to be running
any faster than software,
in fact, in some cases slower.
So to use Quartz 2D on OpenGL,
you have to buy into the whole
asynchronous and the pixels.
They'll show up when they show up.
I never want to look back
at pixels I've drawn,
except very rarely.
Otherwise, it's just not going to
be any faster for you.
Thank you.
So I'll invite Ralph up one last time
for a demo of Quartz 2D on OpenGL.
Okay, the first application I'm
going to show you is iChat.
As you've seen in the keynote,
iChat has now this video
conferencing feature.
The way that video conferencing
view is implemented is
actually fairly interesting.
It is an OpenGL scene.
So there is a video is put on a
texture and this is displayed.
Oops, I think.
I'll be your cameraman.
Please be my cameraman.
That's a good point.
Okay.
So video is put on a texture and
then GL composites that texture.
And the reason why that is done is if
you have a two-way conference going,
you have this little picture-in-picture
which has a drop shadow.
And sometimes there is content being
shown as translucent alert messages
lying on top of live video and stuff.
So GL is really good at these kind
of things and it also does the
conversion from a video YUV to RGB.
So that takes all that load off
the CPU so the CPU is free to do
the actual video encoding and the
networking stuff that is necessary.
So this is a slightly modified
version of iChat to make this demo.
What I'm doing here is I'm
drawing text on top of it.
And this is text drawn
into an OpenGL scene.
And it's not text on a texture.
It is essentially CG show text at point
and then point it at that texture.
So you just draw into it and
you get all the font management,
the kerning,
and all these kind of things that are
usually very hard to get in OpenGL.
My second example I have here,
I have a PDF document.
This one here.
It has a little frame and a
bit of line art in the corner.
By the way,
the way I made this PDF document,
I wrote a little Quartz scripting script,
a Python script that takes the place
of the line art and draws an oval.
So, I'm going to take that
and drag it into my view.
So we put a little oscillator
on it to change size.
But the point here is, again,
this is not drawn into a texture.
Every single frame, we reinterpret that
PDF and draw it on top.
So the scaling you get here
is not scaling of a bitmap.
It's vector art scaling.
So, let me show you something about
the performance of these things.
What I'm running here is a PDF document.
It's the AppKit reference manual,
which is 1,300 pages long.
And I'm just trying to flip
through the pages as fast as I can.
And this is the standard
"Quartz software renderer
that you get in Panther.
And you see that little frame rate
meter in the top right corner?
Yeah, we're getting, you know, between...
"It's kinda low.
50 to 60 frames per second.
So, that's actually,
when you think about it,
pretty impressive.
It's, you know, 60 pages per second.
That definitely beats the LaserWriter."
Okay, but now I will replace the content
view here with an OpenGL view
and then point the same PDF file
at the Quartz OpenGL renderer.
"It gets a bit better.
So, we're around 160 to 180
pages per second now.
And literally the piece of code
that needed to be done there is
something like three lines of setup.
So the rest of the actual rendering
code is exactly the same."
So, why is it fast?
Well, it's what Peter said about
that asynchronous model.
So, what PDF parsing involves, well,
you have to do the parsing and you
have to do decompression of the stream,
and then you draw.
So, what happens in this case,
once you did the decompression
of a graphics primitive,
you just submit it to the GPU,
and while the GPU is doing the graphics,
you're ready to decompress the next
part and do the additional parsing.
So, you have now the CPU and the
GPU running in parallel very nicely.
So, that's, by the way,
the little CPU meter you see there.
This is a two-CPU machine,
so it runs at 50%, so
one CPU is fully busy.
Well, you might wonder now, well,
if I take all that parsing and
decompression stuff out of the loop,
because when I, my application draws,
it doesn't do that.
It just calls the CG APIs.
So, and then I will say, well,
I'm glad you asked.
Because that's what we did,
we essentially took out all the
graphics primitives off that
PDF file and wrote in a big list,
and then just called the
CG APIs to do the same drawing.
So it's technically no longer
a PDF - the drawing of a PDF is
a drawing of the PDF content.
And when I do that,
things start to look like this.
See that the CPU is still busy.
We're actually still - the CPU is
still completely saturated with
sending these commands over to the GPU.
So I would consider that
a tuning opportunity,
but we'll see.
Okay, that's it for this demo.
Thanks Ralph.
Yeah, that's pretty amazing.
I think Ralph was telling
this story about when we were
bringing this demo together.
I think he had to go back, what,
twice to make the frame
counter go higher?
100, that should be enough.
No, 200, that should be enough.
400, okay.
So anyway,
so the recap of kind of the talk today
is basically that there's really a new
era of innovation in platform graphics
that's happening in the industry.
And I think Mac OS X is kind
of leading the charge here.
And it's really kind of a
state-of-the-art visual computing
platform for all your applications.
So in your apps,
please leverage all the great
infrastructure we're building in,
of Quartz 2D and OpenGL.
And I think unlike sort
of in the old days,
there was a period where people
had to work around operating
system infrastructure to try to
do what they wanted to because of
limitations in Quick Draw or GDI or
whatever platform graphics was there.
But I think we're kind of coming upon
a new era where the platform graphics
is getting good enough that you build
on top of it and really can go places.
You don't have to go back and
reinvent all of your blit loops again.
Let us do that work and you guys
add great value on top of that.
And with all these new things
going on in the industry,
particularly with
OpenGL and Fragment program,
it's really fun to go just learn a
few new tricks and crack open the
GL book or something like that and
teach yourself some new techniques.
Because there's a lot
of new stuff happening.
So for the last few minutes of the talk,
what I'm going to do is briefly whiz
you through some of the pointers to
other sessions that you'll want to
check out if hopefully we've piqued
your interest during the talk today.
I'll start with Quartz 2D.
Some of the new things in Panther for
Quartz 2D is PDF 1.4 support,
the PDF introspection
API we talked about,
the Quartz scripting
with the Python bindings,
CMYK rendering context so now
we can drive raster printers
in their native color space.
Numerous performance optimizations and
of course as you saw Quartz 2D on OpenGL.
There's a Quartz 2D in depth
session on Thursday and then an
intro to Quartz services which
talks about some of the display
management infrastructure on Friday.
For Panther obviously we're shipping
1.0 of our X11 implementation
as we talked about yesterday.
This will be a merge with a
4.3 X386 that's on your seed.
We have double clickable X11 applications
now in full screen mode operating.
And a lot of bug fixes.
So check this out in the seed
if you're an X developer.
It's all in the disk you have.
Also new for Panther in printing,
we've got PostScript support.
We're really excited about that -
the ability to basically have any
Mac OS X attached printer be seen on
the network as a PostScript printer.
User interface improvements -
we've got an improved version
of the old desktop printers,
which is coming out in Panther.
We have job submission APIs.
If you know how to calculate your own
PDF file or your own PostScript file,
you can just hand that to the spool
system directly and not have to watch
that page counting dialogue go by.
We're merging with CUPS 1.1.19,
the latest version of CUPS.
And we're also going to be
shipping the GIMP drivers this time
around - the GIMP print drivers,
which are great for legacy printers.
It supports a whole bunch of printers.
And the drivers are really
first-class citizens with their
user interface and integration.
The printing session is on Thursday,
so you'll want to check that out.
For ColorSync, some of the new things.
If you went to the QuickTime talk,
you saw Tim talk a little bit
about ColorSync and its relation
to QuickTime Graphics Importer
to apply profiles by default.
Cameras are going to embed profiles
by default with a standard profile.
Cups and GIMPrint drivers can be
integrated with ColorSync and Vend
profiles and have matching occur.
We've got the Quartz
PDF filters that I talked about.
You'll want to go see those.
And Sips, which is a command line
image processing tool,
which is meant to
interface with AppleScript.
So AppleScripters can do basic image
operations like crop and rotate without
having to launch preview or whatever.
New APIs for abstract profile generation.
ColorSync has the facility to do
actual manipulations in abstract color
spaces like the sepia tone and LAB.
There's going to be new APIs to
how to express those kinds of
color transformations in Panther.
And also a new display
calibrator that's tuned for LCDs.
So go hear about that on Wednesday.
For image capture, a bunch of new stuff.
There are new ways to integrate your
applications with image capture.
There's automatic task.
Image capture services,
which is the Cocoa and
Carbon Service menu,
you can integrate that
with image capture.
There's also a common UI layer
for if you want to do scanning
from within an application,
you can call on that.
There's also network support
for sharing and monitoring image
capture devices over the web,
so that's kind of cool as well.
on Wednesday,
session 204 is image capture.
and OpenGL... Excuse me.
I need my water.
OpenGL, new for Panther.
There's Fragment Program,
Pixel Buffer support,
lots of optimizations about copy
text image and copy text subimage.
We have recoverable GPU support
for drivers that support it.
The ability to reset the GPU on the
fly without bringing the machine down,
which is pretty handy,
especially if you're debugging drivers.
OpenGL Shader Builder and Profiler.
These are two really great tools
we have for OpenGL developers,
and I think you want to go to
the sessions and see those,
because those are really making
great strides in Panther.
Again, the ability to use Quartz
2D in an OpenGL context,
and just lots of bug fixes
and optimization techniques
you can hear about.
So this is a bunch of sessions
that we have for OpenGL.
I'll point out in
particular the last one,
Session 212, on Friday.
We're actually going to have some of
the demo engineers from ATI come and
show you how they built their demo
engine and run through a couple of the
techniques they used in their demos.
Last year we had NVIDIA do this,
and it was a great session,
and it's going to be
great again this year.
Another special session later on today,
we thought it would be really fun to
have the keynote engineers come and
talk about Keynote as an application
and how they really leverage the
platform services in terms of Quartz 2D,
OpenGL, QuickTime, Cocoa,
to build what I think is really a
great application that really kind
of swims downstream with all the
technology and builds on top of what
we're doing in the operating system.
So that'll be a really interesting
session to attend as well.
So, and last but not least,
our feedback forum, which is at 5:00,
the last thing in the conference
in the North Beach conference room.
So come to there,
tell us what we're doing right,
what we're doing wrong,
what you'd like to see
us do in the future,
and we always enjoy talking to you
guys and getting your feedback.